Add documentation guide about memory initialization (#1850)
chipsalliance/chisel3: docs/src/appendix/experimental-features.md

| shiftLeftBinaryPoint(2) | a.aabbb |  5 | X | X  | increase the precision |
| shiftRighBinaryPoint(2) | aaaa.b |  1 | X | X  | reduce the precision |

> ## Loading Memories in simulation or FPGA initialization <a name="loading-memories"></a>

Reviewer: can you update the table-of-contents above to match this title? Also it's a little awkward as written: Maybe

```
Initializing Memories in Simulation or for FPGA Synthesis
```
?

Author: Done! I think "Loading Memories for simulation or FPGA initialization" really sounds better :)
Thanks!

Chisel supports multiple experimental methods for annotating memories to be loaded from a text file containing hex or binary data. When using verilog simulation it uses the `$readmemh` or `$readmemb` verilog extension. The treadle simulator can also load memories using the same annotation.

### Inline initialization with external file

Memories can be initialized by generating inline `readmemh` or `readmemb` statements in the output Verilog.

> The function `loadMemoryFromFileInline` from `chisel3.util.experimental` allows the memory to be initialized by the synthesis software from the specified file. Chisel does not validate the file contents nor it's location. Both the memory initialization file and the Verilog source should be accessible for the toolchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function `loadMemoryFromFileInline` from `chisel3.util.experimental` allows the memory to be initialized by the synthesis software from the specified file. Chisel does not validate the file contents nor its location. Both the memory initialization file and the Verilog source should be accessible for the toolchain.
```

Author: Done! Thanks :)

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.experimental.loadMemoryFromFileInline

class InitMemInline(memoryFile: String = "") extends Module {
  val width: Int = 32
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
    val enable = Input(Bool())
    val write = Input(Bool())
    val addr = Input(UInt(10.W))
    val dataIn = Input(UInt(width.W))
    val dataOut = Output(UInt(width.W))
  })

  val mem = SyncReadMem(1024, UInt(width.W))
  // Initialize memory
  if (memoryFile.trim().nonEmpty) {
    loadMemoryFromFileInline(mem, memoryFile)
  }
  io.dataOut := DontCare
  when(io.enable) {
    val rdwrPort = mem(io.addr)
    when (io.write) { rdwrPort := io.dataIn }
      .otherwise    { io.dataOut := rdwrPort }
  }
}
```

The default is to use `$readmemh` (which assumes all numbers in the file are in ascii hex),

> but to use ascii binary there is an optional `hexOrBinary` argument which can be set to `MemoryLoadFileType.Hex` or `MemoryLoadFileType.Binary`. You will need to add an the additional import.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but to use ascii binary there is an optional `hexOrBinary` argument which can be set to `MemoryLoadFileType.Hex` or `MemoryLoadFileType.Binary`. You will need to add an additional import.
```

Author: Done! Thanks :)

> The inline initialization can generate the memory `readmem` statement inside a `ifndef SYNTHESIS` block, which suits ASIC workflow or outside the block suiting FPGA workflows.

Reviewer: It can? Or does? I'm not clear on what this is saying. Should this be:
```suggestion
By default, the inline initialization will generate the memory `readmem` statements inside an `ifndef SYNTHESIS` block, which suits ASIC workflow, or outside the block suiting FPGA workflows.
```

Still I am not quite sure what this is saying (I am not familiar with this API and reading this is confusing me)

Author: Much better, thanks.

> By default, the inline initialization will generate the memory `readmem` statements inside an `ifndef SYNTHESIS` block, which suits ASIC workflow, or outside the block suiting FPGA workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the inline initialization will generate the memory `readmem` statements inside an `ifndef SYNTHESIS` block, which suits ASIC workflows.
```

Right? For FPGA workflows you have to do all the stuff below? (Again I don't know the right answer, but this sentence seems to contradict the below).

Author: Totally makes sense! Thanks :)

Below an example for initialization suited for FPGA workflows:

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.experimental.loadMemoryFromFileInline
import chisel3.experimental.{annotate, ChiselAnnotation}
import firrtl.annotations.MemorySynthInit

class InitMemInlineFPGA(memoryFile: String = "") extends Module {
  val width: Int = 32
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
    val enable = Input(Bool())
    val write = Input(Bool())
    val addr = Input(UInt(10.W))
    val dataIn = Input(UInt(width.W))
    val dataOut = Output(UInt(width.W))
  })

  // Notice the annotation below
  annotate(new ChiselAnnotation {
    override def toFirrtl =
      MemorySynthInit
  })

  val mem = SyncReadMem(1024, UInt(width.W))
  if (memoryFile.trim().nonEmpty) {
    loadMemoryFromFileInline(mem, memoryFile)
  }
  io.dataOut := DontCare
  when(io.enable) {
    val rdwrPort = mem(io.addr)
    when (io.write) { rdwrPort := io.dataIn }
      .otherwise    { io.dataOut := rdwrPort }
  }
}
```

#### SystemVerilog Bind Initialization

> Chisel also can initialize memories by generating a SV bind module with `readmemh` or `readmemb` statements by using the function `loadMemoryFromFile` from `chisel3.util.experimental`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chisel can also initialize memories by generating a SV bind module with `readmemh` or `readmemb` statements by using the function `loadMemoryFromFile` from `chisel3.util.experimental`.
```

Author: Done.

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.experimental.loadMemoryFromFile

class InitMemBind(val bits: Int, val size: Int, filename: String) extends Module {
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
    val nia = Input(UInt(bits.W))
    val insn = Output(UInt(32.W))
  })

  val memory = Mem(size, UInt(32.W))
  io.insn := memory(io.nia >> 2);
  loadMemoryFromFile(memory, filename)
}
```

Which generates the bind module:

```verilog
module BindsTo_0_Foo(
  input         clock,
  input         reset,
  input  [31:0] io_nia,
  output [31:0] io_insn
);

initial begin
  $readmemh("test.hex", Foo.memory);
end
endmodule

bind Foo BindsTo_0_Foo BindsTo_0_Foo_Inst(.*);
```

### Notes on files

> There is no simple answer to where to put this file. It's probably best to create a resource directory somewhere and reference that through a full path or place the file beside the generated Verilog. Another option is adding the path to the memory file in the synthesis tool path. Because these files may be large, Chisel does not copy them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no simple answer to where to put the `hex` file with the initial contents. It's probably best to create a resource directory somewhere and reference that through a full path or place the file beside the generated Verilog. Another option is adding the path to the memory file in the synthesis tool path. Because these files may be large, Chisel does not copy them.
```

Author: Done! Also added `bin`.

> Don't forget there is no decimal option, so a 10 in an input file will be 16 decimal

> See: [ComplexMemoryLoadingSpec.scala](https://freechipsproject/chisel-testers/src/test/scala/examples/ComplexMemoryLoadingSpec.scala) and

Reviewer: I know your PR did not touch this, but these links don't work for me. Can you clean them up in this PR?

Author: Fixed!

[LoadMemoryFromFileSpec.scala](https://github.com/freechipsproject/chisel-testers/src/test/scala/examples/LoadMemoryFromFileSpec.scala)
for working examples.

### Aggregate memories

Aggregate memories are supported but in bit of a clunky way. Since they will be split up into a memory per field, the following convention was adopted.  When specifying the file for such a memory the file name should be regarded as a template. If the memory is a Bundle e.g.

```scala mdoc:compile-only
class MemDataType extends Bundle {
  val a = UInt(16.W)
  val b = UInt(32.W)
  val c = Bool()
}
```

The memory will be split into `memory_a`, `memory_b`, and `memory_c`. Similarly if a load file is specified as `"memory-load.txt"` the simulation will expect that there will be three files, `"memory-load_a.txt"`, `"memory-load_b.txt"`, `"memory-load_c.txt"`

> Note: The use of `_` and that the memory field name is added before any file suffix. The suffix is optional but if present is considered to be the text after the last `.` in the file name.

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Cleaned up lines.
